README.md, before:

# ece1779
<b>AMI Instructions</b>

<b>Database Instructions</b>

<b>Account Instructions</b>
<br>Provided by email.

<b>Application Usage Instructions</b>
<br>You must first launch an instance with the AMI provided. 

The User UI

 - Create an account in order to be able to upload images and view them. 
 - Clicking on “Upload an Image” will take you to the image upload form. 
   - You can only upload 1 image at a time.
   - All images uploaded will be stored under the ‘ece1779’ bucket in S3

 - The “My Images” link displays all the images you have uploaded so far. 


The Manager UI

 - If you click on the “Manager” link, you will be prompted for the manager credentials.

 - If you want to start multiple instances, launch a load balancer by clicking on “Launch Load Balancer”.
Note that the first launched instance will be outside the worker pool that is created for scaling purposes.

 - You can manually scale the worker pool by clicking “Launch Another Instance” to increase the number of workers by 1, or shrink the pool by terminating instances.

 - You can purge all images stored in the S3 bucket by clicking on “Purge Images”

 - You can enable auto-scaling by clicking on the “Enable Auto-Scaling” checkbox followed by the “Update” button. The application will grow or shrink the worker pool based on the values provided.


<b>Load Generator Tool Instructions</b>
<br>The tool was downloaded from the course website 
http://www.cs.toronto.edu/~delara/courses/ece1779/#projects

We made a few modifications:

1. Added the option of specifying a port to connect to. (LoadGenerator.java: lines 27 -30)
2. Changed the following values of the POST request 
   - submitted file from “uploadedFile” to “theFile”. (Worker.java: line 82)
   - filename from “test.gif” to “test.jpg”. (Worker.java: line 82)
   - message content from “image/gif” to “image/jpeg”. (Worker.java: line 85)

To run the program cd into <vm-directory>/ece1779LoadGenerator/bin
<br>Run as:
   - java ece1779.loadgenerator.LoadGenerator server_ip_address_or_dns_name <port-optional>

Commit message:

changed POST image spec from "theFile" to "uploadedfile"
as per the prof’s email

README.md, after:

# ece1779
<b>AMI Instructions</b>

<b>Database Instructions</b>

<b>Account Instructions</b>
<br>Provided by email.

<b>Application Usage Instructions</b>
<br>You must first launch an instance with the AMI provided. This will become the master instance if the load balancer is started.

The User UI

 - Create an account in order to be able to upload images and view them. 
 - Clicking on “Upload an Image” will take you to the image upload form. 
   - You can only upload 1 image at a time.
   - All images uploaded will be stored under the ‘ece1779’ bucket in S3

 - The “My Images” link displays all the images you have uploaded so far. 


The Manager UI

 - If you click on the “Manager” link, you will be prompted for the manager credentials.

 - If you want to start multiple instances, launch a load balancer by clicking on “Launch Load Balancer”.
The master instance can only be removed from the AWS console and not from the application.

 - You can manually scale the worker pool by clicking “Launch Another Instance” to increase the number of workers by 1, or shrink the pool by terminating instances.

 - You can purge all images stored in the S3 bucket by clicking on “Purge Images”

 - You can enable auto-scaling by clicking on the “Enable Auto-Scaling” checkbox followed by the “Update” button. The application will grow or shrink the worker pool based on the values provided.


<b>Load Generator Tool Instructions</b>
<br>The tool was downloaded from the course website 
http://www.cs.toronto.edu/~delara/courses/ece1779/#projects

To run the program cd into <vm-directory>/ece1779LoadGenerator/bin
<br>Run as:
   - java ece1779.loadgenerator.LoadGenerator server_ip_address_or_dns_name <port-optional>
